Upgrade PSR interfaces (#1195)
php-fig/fig-standards: bylaws/008-psr-evolution.md

# PSR evolution

## Scope and objectives

A PSR is often comprised of text and code, generally interfaces. Those interfaces are pieces of code that are released and tagged at a specific moment in time. However, the PHP language doesn't stand still; it evolves over time.

> This means that those interfaces need to both provide a stable contract, as well as evolve to leverage new language features that could help better enforce the behaviors exposed in the PSR itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that those interfaces need to both provide a stable contract, as well as evolve to leverage new language features that could help better enforce the behaviors described in the PSR itself.
```

> At the same time, a PSR cannot be changed after its release (at which point only erratas are allowed), to protect a package that declared compatibility from becoming de-facto not compatible anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, a PSR cannot be changed after its release (at which point only erratas are allowed), to protect a package that declared compatibility from becoming de facto incompatible.
```

This document defines a process to be followed in updating PSR interfaces, in a way that is not breaking in regard to behavior for end users, and with an appropriate upgrade path for the consumers.

## Definitions

>  * **Consumer** - libraries and projects that implement and/or consume the code released as part of the PSR in question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * **Consumer** - a library or project that implements and/or consumes the code released as part of the PSR in question.
```

Reviewer 2: One note on this part.  In PSRs, we tend to differentiate between an *Implementer* (who implements a PSR interface) and a *Consumer* (who composes it).  Strictly speaking both are "consumers" (in the economic sense) of a PSR, but I fear it may cause some confusion down the line.  Can we use the more standard terminology here, even if it makes it slightly longer?

Author: Done with aa3e198 :+1:

## New releases

A new minor release of a PHP-FIG package containing interfaces for a PSR MUST follow these rules:
 * the new release MUST follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) rules;
 * the PSR behavior MUST NOT be altered;
 * consumers or implementers of those interfaces MUST NOT suffer breaking changes;
 * the PHP version constraint of the PHP-FIG package MAY be increased to leverage newer language features, especially those that would aid cross-compatibility of consumers and implementers with the old and the new versions;
 * the PHP version constraint of the PHP-FIG package MUST NOT be altered to use newer language features that would create cross-compatibility issues.
 
A new major release of a PHP-FIG package containing interfaces for a PSR MUST follow the same rules, with this exception:
 * the new major version of the package MAY contain breaking changes if the implementing packages have a reasonable upgrade path, like the possibility of releasing a cross-compatible implementation with the previous releases;
 * the new major version of the package MAY refer to a new, superseding PSR.
 

> Note that if the upgrade path causes the consumers or implementers to maintain multiple versions of their libraries side-by-side, only to support multiple versions of the same PSR, the upgrade path is to be considered too steep.

Reviewer 3: This IMHO is a bit unclear: `[...] the upgrade path is to be considered too steep.`
To steep for what? A minor release or a major release or a new release of the same PSR?
Also, I'd then state what the recommended step is if the upgrade path is considered too steep.

Author: The point here is that an approach that is to be considered too steep is to be discarded completely. As a PSR, we cannot try to outskirt the issues, we have less ways to circumvent problems because interop an easiness of use is paramount.

### Workflow

Since releasing new versions of the interfaces MUST NOT alter the PSR in its behavior, those releases can be voted in with the same process as errata changes. The new releases MUST be declared and embedded with a brief explanation and a link in the PSR document, like in the following example:

> > \`\`\`php

Reviewer 4: This does not render properly (at least on github) though.

Author: We lose the whitespace inside the code snippet, but the rest of the content is good:

![immagine](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6729988/68950491-8b44a800-07bc-11ea-9ef4-17a1d66e3e19.png)

# PSR evolution

## Scope and objectives

A PSR is often comprised of text and code, more specifically interfaces. Those interfaces are pieces of code that are released and tagged at a specific moment in time, but the PHP language doesn't stand still... it evolves over time.

This means that those interfaces need to withstand that evolution, and sometimes they need to be updated, to leverage new language features that could help better enforce the behaviors exposed in the PSR itself.

> At the same time, a PSR cannot be changed after its release (only erratas allowed), to protect a package that declared compatibility from becoming de-facto not compatible anymore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

At the same time, a PSR cannot be changed after its release (only erratas allowed), to protect a package that declared compatibility from becoming de-facto not compatible anymore.
```

This document defines a process to be followed in updating PSR interfaces, in a way that is not breaking in regard to behavior for end users, and with an appropriate upgrade path for the packages.

## New releases

A new minor release of a PHP-FIG package containing interfaces for a PSR MUST follow these rules:
 * the new release MUST follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) rules;
 * the PSR behavior MUST NOT be altered;
 * the packages that implement the interfaces or users that are consuming them MUST NOT suffer breaking changes;
 * the PHP version constraint of the PHP-FIG package MAY be altered to require newer language features that would aid cross-compatibility;
 * the PHP version constraint of the PHP-FIG package MUST NOT be altered to use newer language features that would create cross-compatibility issues.
 
A new major release of a PHP-FIG package containing interfaces for a PSR MUST follow the same rules, with this exception:

>  * the new major version of the package MAY contain breaking changes if the implementing packages have a reasonable upgrade path, like the possibility of releasing a cross-compatible implementation with the previous releases;

Reviewer 5: It is my concern that the language used, "have a reasonable upgrade path", to define an exception, is broad and vague and candidate for easy abuse. Perhaps it is safe to bind this to a clear example of what is explicitly NOT "reasonable".

I believe something specific can be formulated along the lines of:
> If the upgrade path causes userland to maintain multiple versions of their software side-by-side, only to support multiple versions of the same PSR, the upgrade path is too steep.

I'm unclear whether that's an improvement, but would like at least to have this considered by people more clever than myself.

Reviewer 6: I agree with @johmanx10 here - "reasonable" is very subjective. Having examples of unreasonable and/or reasonable paths would help remove uncertainty and the possibility of unfair handling of different PSR evolutions.

I think the sentence Jan-Marten suggests is spot on.

 * the new major version of the package MAY refer to a new, superseding PSR.

### Workflow

> Since releasing new versions of the interfaces MUST NOT alter the PSR in its behavior, those releases can be voted in with the same process as errata changes. The new releases MUST be declared and embedded in the PSR document, with eventual indications on the upgrade path in the meta document.

Reviewer 2: This would be the first time we make non-trivial changes to the spec document rather than the metadoc.  It... kinda makes sense in context here but the end result is that PSR-3 would end up with 3 versions of all its code in the spec doc.  That's... a lot of change.

I don't have a better idea off hand, but this worries me.

Reviewer 6: It depends on what is meant by "declared and embedded in the PSR document". Does this mean embedding the different versions of the interface? Or does it mean a link to the tagged version of the new interfaces in their repo (e.g., https://github.com/php-fig/http-message/releases/tag/1.0.1)?

We need clarification on what that phrase means.

Author: I had in mind adding a new code snippet with the changes, something along the lines of "Since version 1.1, the interface was changed to receive argument types: <code snippet>".

Would this phrasing be fine for you?

```suggestion
Since releasing new versions of the interfaces MUST NOT alter the PSR in its behavior, those releases can be voted in with the same process as errata changes. The new releases MUST be declared and embedded in the PSR document following the original code snippets in the original document, with eventual indications on the upgrade path in the meta document.
```

Reviewer 6: The problem with saying "following the original code snippets" is that the current "code snippets" are full interface definitions generally - or do you mean something like this:

```markdown
\`\`\`php
interface ContainerInterface
{
    /**
     * Test whether or not a service is registered in the container.
     *
     * @param string $name
     * @return bool
     */
    public function has($name);

    /**
     * Retrieve a service from the container:
     *
     * @param string $name
     * @return object
     */
    public function get($name);
}
\`\`\`

> Since psr/container version 1.1, the above interface has been updated to add argument type hints.
```

(added escape characters on the embedded code sample so it would highlight properly)

Basically, I think even with clarifications to the verbiage, we may also need an example.

Author: Is e0c9954 enough for this?

Reviewer 7: Maybe there is another way to do this entirely: we are already versioning the spec document with Git, so why don't we just update the document with the latest changes, specifying the version in the header, and list all the various versions in the website?

Author: I fear that that approach would complicate the site a lot, since it would have to use the submodule at multiple commits, and commits would've have to be fixed. Or we would have to have branches. Too complicated for a simple document.

### Practical example

A common case for an upgrade in the interfaces is to add types for parameters and returns, since they are new language features introduced by PHP 7, and many PSR interfaces predate that release. We'll use a method from PSR-11 as an example of how a PSR interface could be updated.

#### PSR-11: the interface

PSR-11 is released with the [`psr/container` package](https://packagist.org/packages/psr/container) and it holds the `ContainerInterface`, which has this method:

> ```php

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```php
```

    /**
     * @param string $id Identifier of the entry to look for.
     *
     * @return bool
     */
    public function has($id);
```
This method could be updated with a new minor release that adds the argument type for `$id`:
```php
public function has(string $id);
```

> This change would technically be a breaking change, but thanks to the [limited contravariance possible in PHP 7.2](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/parameter-no-type-variance), we can avoid that. This means that just by requiring `"php": "^7.2"` in the `prs/container` `composer.json`, we could tag this change as a minor release, and have all the implementors be automatically cross-compatible, provided that they declare `"psr/container": "^1.0"` (or equivalent) as a constraint, which they should.

Reviewer 8: s/prs/psr/

> This change would technically be a breaking change, but thanks to the [limited contravariance possible in PHP 7.2](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/parameter-no-type-variance), we can avoid that. This means that just by requiring `"php": "^7.2"` in the `psr/container` `composer.json`, we could tag this change as a minor release, and have all the implementors be automatically cross-compatible, provided that they declare `"psr/container": "^1.0"` (or equivalent) as a constraint, which they should.

Reviewer 2: I thought we were going to go with major versions here to avoid the different-environment issue that @nicolas-grekas pointed out.

Author: This could be discussed. I understand Nicolas motivation, but OTOH this approach would not require action from the implementing libraries on the first step, and that's why I preferred it.

Reviewer 8: I've thought twice about this: given that no apps require any psr packages directly, it means that they come transitively. If we go with v2 here, and if all libs update their composer.json to allow it, then the different-environment issue appears also.
This means my argument is fragilized here, maybe not worth it. For thoughts.

Reviewer 9: Actually, I believe that the expectancy would be that apps that calls the interfaces in their code (and only link interfaces to implementation some other code) actually require psr packages directly.
As this is what they should do. If you use a namespace in your code, you should have the package providing it in composer.json.

But I also believe that apps do not require psr packages. And a minor change will trigger a composer update to upgrade it to 1.1 from 1.0.
And mainly that's what I also argued earlier that a major version is needed as otherwise $container->has(1) that returns false, after change, will throw a `TypeError`.

Author: > [...] otherwise $container->has(1) that returns false, after change, will throw a TypeError.

That's true only if you're using `strict_types=1`, and only at the implementation change, not on the interface change; so the implementation can choose on its own if the change warrants a major or not.

Reviewer 9: Thank you @Jean85 for explaining it again. You're right, I understood it now. It's true that IDE might complain about you using an interface method with a wrong parameter type but at run-time the check is done against the actual implementing class, not against the interface... obviously, I would say now.

I don't have any other issue with it being a minor version of psr package with php ^7.2 required.

A PSR is often comprised of text and code, more specifically interfaces. Those interfaces are pieces of code that are released and tagged at a specific moment in time, but the PHP language doesn't stand still... it evolves over time.

This means that those interfaces need to withstand that evolution, and sometimes they need to be updated, to leverage new language features that could help better enforce the behaviors exposed in the PSR itself.

At the same time, a PSR cannot be changed after its release (only erratas allowed), to protect a package that declared compatibility from becoming de-facto not compatible anymore.

This document defines a process to be followed in updating PSR interfaces, in a way that is not breaking in regard to behavior for end users, and with an appropriate upgrade path for the packages.

## New releases

A new minor release of a PHP-FIG package containing interfaces for a PSR MUST follow these rules:
 * the new release MUST follow [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) rules;
 * the PSR behavior MUST NOT be altered;
 * the packages that implement the interfaces or users that are consuming them MUST NOT suffer breaking changes;

>  * the PHP version constraint of the PHP-FIG package MAY be altered to require newer language features that would aid cross-compatibility;

Reviewer 6: I think you need to define what is meant by the term "cross-compatibility" before using it here. Are we talking "forwards compatibility", whereby the code adds features that would make it compatible with later versions of PHP, while retaining compatibility with current versions? Or are we talking compatibility with both consumer and implementor? or something else?

Author: I wrote this thinking about the current specific case of bumping to 7.2 to allow dropping types. Would a reword like this one work for you?

```suggestion
 * the PHP version constraint of the PHP-FIG package MAY be increased to leverage newer language features, especially those that would aid cross-compatibility of consumers with the old and the new versions;
```

Reviewer 6: That sounds perfect!

Reviewer 6: Only part is: I'd put that in a "Terminology" section at the beginning (we do that in a few PSRs already, so it will be familiar to PSR readers). That way, when it's referenced elsewhere, the context is fully known.

Author: I've added that with 94b5cc79e6b9c35788737dd76164f87690a0cc71, is it ok?

Reviewer: @Jean85 Please either commit your suggestion (which looks good to me as well) or mark this conversation as resolved. The Terminology section helps, but it wouldn't hurt to have the extra clarity here.

 * the new major version of the package MAY refer to a new, superseding PSR.

### Workflow

Since releasing new versions of the interfaces MUST NOT alter the PSR in its behavior, those releases can be voted in with the same process as errata changes. The new releases MUST be declared and embedded in the PSR document, with eventual indications on the upgrade path in the meta document.

### Practical example

A common case for an upgrade in the interfaces is to add types for parameters and returns, since they are new language features introduced by PHP 7, and many PSR interfaces predate that release. We'll use a method from PSR-11 as an example of how a PSR interface could be updated.

#### PSR-11: the interface

PSR-11 is released with the [`psr/container` package](https://packagist.org/packages/psr/container) and it holds the `ContainerInterface`, which has this method:

```php
    /**
     * @param string $id Identifier of the entry to look for.
     *
     * @return bool
     */
    public function has($id);
```

> This method could be updated with a new minor release that adds the argument type for `$id`:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

This method could be updated with a new minor release that adds the argument type for `$id`:

```

```php
public function has(string $id);
```

> This change would technically be a breaking change, but thanks to the [limited contravariance possible in PHP 7.2](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/parameter-no-type-variance), we can avoid that. This means that just by requiring `"php": "^7.2"` in the `psr/container` `composer.json`, we could tag this change as a minor release, and have all the implementors be automatically cross-compatible, provided that they declare `"psr/container": "^1.0"` (or equivalent) as a constraint, which they should.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

This change would technically be a breaking change, but thanks to the [limited contravariance possible in PHP 7.2](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/parameter-no-type-variance), we can avoid that. This means that just by requiring `"php": "^7.2"` in the `psr/container` `composer.json`, we could tag this change as a minor release, and have all the implementors be automatically cross-compatible, provided that they declare `"psr/container": "^1.0"` (or equivalent) as a constraint.
```

(Adds whitespace before the paragraph, and removes editorializing.)

> After this intermediate step, it would be possible to release a new major version, that would add the return type:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
After this intermediate step, it would be possible to release a new major version, adding a return type hint:

```

```php
public function has(string $id): bool;
```

> This must be released as a new major version of `psr/container` (2.0); any package that would implement this would be able to declare `"psr/container": "^1.1 || ^2.0"`, since backward compatibility to the first release would be impossible, due to the sum of covariance and contravariance rules.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

This must be released as a new major version of `psr/container` (2.0); any package that would implement this would be able to declare `"psr/container": "^1.1 || ^2.0"`, since backward compatibility to the first release would be impossible, due to the sum of covariance and contravariance rules.
```

Adds whitespace before paragraph.

#### PSR-11: the implementation

> On the other side, the implementing packages would be able to do a release cycle in the opposite fashion. The first release looks like this:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
On the other side, the implementing packages would be able to do a release cycle in the opposite fashion. The first release looks like this:

```

(whitespace)

```php
public function has($id);
```

> The second release would adds the return type, maintaining compatibility with the original interface:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

The second release would add the return type, maintaining compatibility with the original interface:

```

(whitespace, and removal of plural form)

```php
public function has($id): bool;
```

> A third release would be tagged then, adding the argument type too:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

A third release would also add the argument type hint:

```

(whitespace, and active form)

### Workflow

Since releasing new versions of the interfaces MUST NOT alter the PSR in its behavior, those releases can be voted in with the same process as errata changes. The new releases MUST be declared and embedded in the PSR document, with eventual indications on the upgrade path in the meta document.

### Practical example

A common case for an upgrade in the interfaces is to add parameters and return types, since they are a new language feature introduced by PHP 7, and many PSR interfaces predates that release. In the next paragraph, we'll try to use PSR-3 as an example to show how a PSR interface should be updated.

#### PSR-3: the interface

PSR-3 is released with the [`psr/log` package](https://packagist.org/packages/psr/log) and it contains the `LoggerInterface`, which has this method:
```php
/**
 * Logs with an arbitrary level.
 *
 * @param mixed  $level
 * @param string $message
 * @param array  $context
 *
 * @return void
 */
public function log($level, $message, array $context = array());
```
This method could be updated with a new minor release that adds the argument type for `$message`:
```php
public function log($level, string $message, array $context = []);
```

> This change would be technically a breaking change but, thanks to the [limited contravariance possible in PHP 7.2](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/parameter-no-type-variance), we can avoid that. This means that just by requiring `"php": "^7.2"` in the `prs/log` `composer.json`, we could tag this change as a minor release, and have all the implementors be automatically cross-compatible, provided that they declare `"psr/log": "^1.0"` (or equivalent) as a constraint, which they should.

Reviewer 9: Indeed, this would not be a breaking change for implementing library.
But, as I was explaining on the thread, it will be a breaking change for project and libraries that calls the `log` method.
Even if the docblock specified what message parameter type is, there was no strong enforcement. After a minor release, there will be a language runtime enforcement.

Just as return types can be reduced for callers but cannot be reduced for implementors, similarly, parameter types can be reduced for implementors but cannot be reduced for callers.

Author: That's not true: the fact that the interface is requiring a certain type is not enforced until the library adds the same type too, thanks to PHP 7.2. At that point, it should be up to the libraries to decide if they want to adhere strictly to the interface, add the types and create a breaking change or not.

Due to LSP, implementing libraries are free to accept MORE types than the one required by the interface.

Reviewer 9: I agree that when adding types to parameters there is no breaking changing on the implementing libraries.
I argue that there would be a breaking change on the consuming libraries.

Author: That depends totally on the implementing libraries. As highlighted in https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/pull/1195#discussion_r334586301, for Monolog specifically they could choose to not enforce `string` due to stringable objects being accepted.

After this intermediate step, it would be possible to release a new major, that would add the return type:
```php
public function log($level, string $message, array $context = []): void;
```
This must be released as a new major version of `psr/log` (2.0); any package that would implement this would be able to declare `"psr/log": "^1.2 || ^2.0"`, since backward compatibility to the first release would be impossible, due to the sum of covariance and contravariance rules.

#### PSR-3: the implementation

On the other side, the implementing packages would be able to do a release cycle in the opposite fashion. Using Monolog as an example, the first release looks like this:
```php
public function log($level, $message, array $context = array());
```
The second release (which at the time of this writing is already tagged as 2.0) adds the return type, maintaining compatibility with the original interface:
```php
public function log($level, $message, array $context = []): void;
```
A possible third release could be tagged in the future, adding the argument type too:
```php

> public function log($level, string $message, array $context = []): void;

Reviewer 10: This is wrong and you might need to be extra careful here...as you want to evolve.. 

Docblock says that the argument is a string but the PSR in some point mentions that it could be an object that can be cast to a string.

> public function log($level, string $message, array $context = []): void;

Reviewer 10: This is wrong and you might need to be extra careful here...as you want to evolve..

Docblock says that the argument is a string but the PSR in some point mentions that it could be an object that can be cast to a string.

Reviewer 10: For the record

https://github.com/php-fig/log/pull/60

Author: You're right, probably PSR-3 is a bad example. I should use a different interface then.

A PSR is often comprised of text and code, more specifically interfaces. Those interfaces are pieces of code that are released and tagged at a specific moment in time, but the PHP language doesn't stand still... it evolves over time.

This means that those interfaces need to withstand that evolution, and sometimes they need to be updated, to leverage new language features that could help better enforce the behaviors exposed in the PSR itself.

At the same time, a PSR cannot be changed after its release (only erratas allowed), to protect a package that declared compatibility from becoming de-facto not compatible anymore.

> This document defines a process to be followed in updating PSR interfaces, in a way that is not breaking in regard to behavior for end users, and with an appropriate upgrade path for the packages.

Reviewer 11: good work
